# Caderno: Mission and Vision Document

## Mission

Caderno is a privacy-first, decentralized journaling platform dedicated
to safeguarding personal truths and empowering those who speak truth to
power. Our mission is to provide **journalists, whistleblowers,
survivors, and activists** with a secure digital space to document their
experiences and insights without fear of censorship or surveillance.
Users can record daily reflections or sensitive witness testimony in
encrypted "journal pantries" stored on a decentralized cloud that
**they** control. A core feature of Caderno is an optional safety
mechanism (a form of *dead man's switch*): users may set a timed
**alarm** that, if triggered, automatically compiles and delivers their
journal entries to pre-selected email addresses or phone numbers. This
ensures that crucial information will be shared with trusted contacts in
case the user is unable to do so themselves -- a powerful safeguard
**protecting users from those who might wish to silence or harm them**.
By combining strong cryptographic protection with a federated
(self-hostable) infrastructure, Caderno's mission is to **put control
back into the hands of the people**, enabling them to document truth and
**preserve evidence with confidence and integrity**.

## Vision

Our vision is a world where **personal narratives and critical truths
are preserved securely, transparently, and resiliently** -- beyond the
reach of any single authority or adversary. We envision Caderno as more
than just a journaling app: it is an **ethical digital sanctuary** that
fosters transparency and **resilience** in the face of oppression or
adversity. In this future, **empowered individuals speak truth to
power** and hold the powerful accountable without fear, using technology
that guarantees their voices cannot be erased. Caderno aims to set a new
standard for journaling and personal documentation by normalizing
**end-to-end encryption, decentralization, and user autonomy** as
default expectations. By **federating** the platform, we see a rich
ecosystem of user-operated servers around the world, collectively
forming a network that is highly available and censorship-resistant.
Ultimately, our vision is to **give power back to the people**: each
user owns their data, controls their narrative, and can trust that their
private thoughts or critical evidence remain secure yet ready to
galvanize change when needed.

## Ethos

Caderno's ethos is grounded in the principles of **transparency,
resilience, and empowerment**, guided by a commitment to **privacy,
security, and social accountability**. Our core values include:

-   **Transparency:** We believe in openness in both technology and
    governance. Caderno is fully open-source, allowing anyone to inspect
    or contribute to the code. This transparency fosters trust and
    accountability -- there are no hidden backdoors or secrets in how
    Caderno operates. *(In line with this principle, the source code is
    publicly available for scrutiny, affirming our commitment to
    trustworthiness[\[1\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=file%20storage%2C%20ensuring%20superior%20data,end%20encrypted%20file%20storage).)*
    We also maintain clear communication with our community about our
    practices and updates, ensuring users are never in the dark.

-   **Privacy:** **Privacy is a fundamental human right** and the
    foundation of our platform. Caderno is built from the ground up to
    protect user privacy, using end-to-end encryption for journal
    entries by default. Only the user (and whomever they explicitly
    share with) can read their entries -- not us as developers, not any
    hosting provider, nor any third party. We **do not collect or
    monetize personal data**. In contrast to conventional note-taking
    apps that may have access to user content (for example, Google Keep
    lacks advanced safeguards like end-to-end encryption and even
    operates on an advertising-based
    model[\[2\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=1,which%20often%20involves%20data%20collection)),
    Caderno never exploits or analyzes the user's private writings for
    profit. Users retain full ownership and control of their data.

-   **Security & Resilience:** We recognize that our users, especially
    **journalists and activists, face sophisticated threats** -- from
    hackers and spyware to coercive forces. Caderno's design prioritizes
    robust cybersecurity measures to defend against these threats. All
    data is secured with modern cryptography (using strong encryption
    algorithms and best practices) both **in transit and at rest**.
    Because Caderno is **decentralized and federated**, there is no
    single point of failure: no central server that a malicious actor or
    censor can take down to compromise the network. This distributed
    architecture inherently provides **resilience against outages and
    censorship**, ensuring that even under hostile conditions, users can
    safely record and access their
    information[\[3\]](https://medium.com/@sshshln/the-future-of-social-networking-decentralization-for-user-empowerment-privacy-and-freedom-from-a0a8f74790cb#:~:text=Both%20traditional%20and%20decentralized%20social,is%20presented%20in%20Table%201).
    Our ethos of security also means **constant vigilance**: we
    encourage third-party security audits and community reporting of
    vulnerabilities, and we respond transparently to any security
    issues. *We recall real-world cases where activists' devices and
    online platforms were infiltrated by adversaries (for example,
    spyware like NSO Group's Pegasus was used to surveil thousands of
    targets including
    journalists[\[4\]](https://www.internetsociety.org/resources/doc/2021/factsheet-how-encryption-can-protect-advocacy-groups-and-social-change-movements/#:~:text=,communications%20from%20surveillance%20and%20interception));
    such incidents drive our relentless focus on hardening Caderno
    against intrusion.* In sum, our ethos is to **protect and preserve**
    -- protecting user data from prying eyes and preserving their voice
    even in volatile circumstances.

-   **Empowerment & Advocacy:** Caderno is not just a tool, but a means
    of empowerment. We stand for **user autonomy and freedom of
    expression**. By giving users the ability to **self-host** their
    journals on servers they control, we eliminate dependency on big
    corporations or governments -- **power is returned to the people**.
    Users can operate in whatever jurisdiction or environment they feel
    safest, or join a community-run server aligned with their
    principles. This federated model encourages a grassroots approach to
    information ownership. We see Caderno as part of a larger movement
    to **democratize technology and uphold digital rights**. In
    practice, this means we design features specifically to support
    those who risk much to tell the truth: for example, the
    aforementioned journal alarm feature embodies **"speaking truth to
    power"** by acting as a form of insurance -- even if someone tries
    to silence a whistleblower, their story will still come out. Our
    ethos compels us to support these courageous users: **Caderno stands
    with the whistleblower, the survivor, and the activist**. We are
    inspired by the principle that encryption and secure communication
    enable advocacy groups and individuals to hold the powerful
    accountable[\[5\]](https://www.internetsociety.org/resources/doc/2021/factsheet-how-encryption-can-protect-advocacy-groups-and-social-change-movements/#:~:text=Encryption%20is%20an%C2%A0essential%20tool%C2%A0that%20enables,advocacy%20groups%20rely%20on%20encryption).
    By using Caderno, users can "write fearlessly" knowing the platform
    is on their side, prioritizing their safety and mission.

-   **Accountability & Integrity:** We strive to create a culture of
    accountability -- both for ourselves and as a tool for users to hold
    others accountable. Internally, we hold ourselves to high ethical
    standards in developing this app (e.g. no dark patterns, no
    compromising on security for profit). Externally, Caderno's very
    purpose is to help **document truth with integrity**, creating
    immutable records (through cryptographic timestamping or future
    features like content versioning) that can serve as evidence. We
    treat a user's journal, especially if it contains witness testimony
    or evidence of wrongdoing, as sacrosanct. With the user's consent,
    Caderno can ensure these records are **available to trusted parties
    or the public** (in redacted or summary form) in case of emergency
    -- shining a light on truths that might otherwise be buried. This
    fosters a form of *social accountability*, where bad actors know
    that harming an Caderno user could trigger the exposure of the very
    information they wish to suppress. In this way, the platform aligns
    with the ethos of *justice and empowerment*, reinforcing that **the
    truth will find a way out**.

In summary, Caderno's ethos is defined by a deep respect for user rights
and a proactive stance in **defending those who defy silence**. We
champion **transparency** in how we operate, **resilience** in
technology and community, and **empowerment** of every individual's
voice. These principles aren't just words on paper for us -- they are
the guiding light in every decision, feature, and policy associated with
Caderno.

## Privacy

**Privacy is paramount in Caderno's design and operation.** We recognize
that in many cases, a journal entry isn't just a private thought -- it
could be sensitive information that, if exposed, might endanger the
writer or others. Therefore, Caderno employs rigorous privacy
protections to ensure users can write freely and **confidentially**.

**End-to-End Encryption:** All journal entries can be end-to-end
encrypted (E2EE) by the client before being stored or sent anywhere.
This means entries are **encoded in such a way that only the author (and
their intended recipients, if any) can decrypt and read
them**[\[6\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=A%20journalist%20sets%20a%20switch,endangering%20him).
Even if a server hosting the data is compromised or someone intercepts
the data, the content remains unintelligible without the decryption
keys. Caderno's encryption model covers data at rest and in transit --
journals are encrypted on the user's device and stay encrypted on the
server, with secure protocols used for any data transfer. *There are
absolutely no "back doors" or special access keys.* Not even Caderno's
developers or a server administrator can read the encrypted entries,
which underscores our zero-knowledge approach to user data. This level
of security is non-negotiable: as advocacy groups and privacy experts
note, **end-to-end encryption is the best assurance that personal data
and communications are shielded from prying
eyes**[\[7\]](https://www.aclu.org/news/privacy-technology/the-vital-role-of-end-to-end-encryption#:~:text=The%20Vital%20Role%20of%20End,are%20shielded%20from%20prying%20eyes).

**Federated, Decentralized Storage:** Privacy is also enhanced by
Caderno's federated architecture. Users can choose to host their
journals on their own server or pick a trusted host (for example, a
non-profit organization, a community collective, or a friend) rather
than a monolithic corporate server. Because any user can spin up their
own Caderno server, it **eliminates centralized data silos** that are
attractive targets for mass surveillance or hacks. Each server operates
independently, sharing no more data with the network than necessary. *If
you run your own server, your data lives on hardware you control; if you
use someone else's server, you've at least chosen one that aligns with
your privacy expectations.* In either case, federation prevents any
single entity from having access to all user data. This decentralization
is a stark contrast to mainstream cloud note services where one company
stores millions of users' notes in one place. Our approach drastically
reduces the risk of large-scale privacy breaches.

**No Tracking or Data Monetization:** Caderno does not and will not
engage in any form of tracking beyond what is absolutely necessary for
security (for instance, basic logging to detect abuse, which is done
transparently and, where possible, anonymized or pseudonymized). We do
not use analytics that profile our users' behavior, and we certainly do
not scan journal content for advertising or other monetization. Unlike
some popular free journaling apps that rely on advertising or data
mining (e.g., **Google Keep's revenue model is advertising-based,
meaning user data can be leveraged for
targeting[\[8\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=2,which%20often%20involves%20data%20collection)**),
Caderno's open-source, user-centric model is **user-funded and
community-driven**. Our commitment is that your data will only ever
serve you, not us. We also provide an **offline-first** experience:
users can create and read entries offline; sync is optional. This means
you can keep your journal purely local (fully off the cloud) if you
desire absolute isolation.

**User Anonymity and Pseudonymity:** To use Caderno, we minimize
required personal information. Users may sign up with just a
pseudonym/username and an email or phone *only if necessary* for
features like the emergency alarm. Even then, such contact info is
stored in encrypted form on the server. For those at risk, we encourage
using secure, anonymous email accounts or dedicated phone numbers.
Federated servers may have their own registration policies, but the
official Caderno project provides guidance on privacy-friendly setup.
Additionally, because federation allows communities of trust, users
might join servers specifically catering to journalists or activists
where privacy norms are strongest. Our aim is that **users should feel
safe to express themselves without revealing their identity** unless
they choose to.

**Transparency and Control:** Privacy is also about giving users control
over their own information. Caderno provides intuitive settings for
users to manage their data. This includes the ability to export all
entries at any time (in an encrypted form or plaintext as the user
chooses), to permanently delete entries (wiping them from the server),
and to configure which contacts will receive their journal in an
emergency. All such features are built to **empower the user's agency
over their data**. We are transparent about how data flows through
Caderno: for example, if a user enables the journal alarm feature, we
explain how their entries will be compiled and encrypted for delivery,
and that the app will periodically check a "heartbeat" to know when to
send (with this check itself done in a privacy-preserving way). Users
are always in the driver's seat -- features are opt-in and customizable.

**Differentiation from Mainstream Apps:** Caderno's strict stance on
privacy sets it apart from typical journaling or note-taking apps. For
instance, Apple's new iOS Journal app emphasizes privacy and uses
on-device processing, yet it remains a **closed ecosystem** tied to
Apple's
platform[\[9\]](https://cybernews.com/editorial/apples-journal-app-privacy/#:~:text=Furthermore%2C%20the%20Journal%20app%20is,app%27s%20potential%20usability%20and%20accessibility).
Apple's solution does offer end-to-end encryption for iCloud-stored
entries[\[10\]](https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2023/12/apple-launches-journal-app-a-new-app-for-reflecting-on-everyday-moments/#:~:text=Journal%20is%20built%20with%20privacy,added%20to%20their%20Journal%20entries),
which we applaud; however, one must still *trust Apple's implementation
and infrastructure*, and it's limited to Apple devices and services. In
contrast, Caderno's open-source nature allows independent verification
of its privacy claims, and its federated model ensures you're not locked
into a single vendor or device family. Likewise, Google Keep (and
similar cloud note apps) are designed for convenience over
confidentiality; as mentioned, Google's employees or attackers with
access to Google's servers **could theoretically read Keep notes** since
they are not end-to-end
encrypted[\[11\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=Employees%20can%20read%20your%20notes%E2%9C%85%E2%9D%8C,factor%20authentication%E2%9C%85%E2%9C%85).
Caderno rejects that trade-off -- we choose privacy over Big Data
convenience. Your Caderno journal remains **your eyes only** until you
decide to share it.

In summary, privacy in Caderno is not just a feature -- it's the default
and the foundation. We leverage cutting-edge encryption and a
decentralized architecture to ensure that **only you control access to
your thoughts and experiences**. By doing so, Caderno creates a space
where **honesty and vulnerability can thrive** without fear, and where
even the most sensitive information (be it a personal reflection or
evidence of corruption) is under **lock and key that only you hold**.
Our motto could well be: *"Your story, your control"*, reflecting our
unwavering commitment to user privacy.

## Cybersecurity

Ensuring robust cybersecurity is crucial for an application that
promises protection to high-risk users. Caderno approaches security with
a **holistic, defense-in-depth strategy** to safeguard user data and the
platform's integrity against threats. Our security philosophy can be
summarized as *"trust no one, verify everything"* -- not even us --
which aligns with zero-trust principles and the idea that security
should rely on mathematics and design, not on trusting people or
companies[\[12\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=Traditional%20digital%20will%20services%20often,%E2%80%9D).

Key aspects of Caderno's cybersecurity plan include:

-   **State-of-the-Art Encryption:** As noted in the Privacy section,
    Caderno uses strong encryption standards (such as AES-256 and
    RSA/ECC or even post-quantum algorithms as they become practical) to
    protect data. We implement **end-to-end encryption (E2EE)** for
    journal content, which ensures that even if the data is stored on a
    server or in transit across a network, it's indecipherable without
    the user's private
    keys[\[13\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=Without%20encryption%2C%20anyone%20accessing%20the,your%20data%20in%20plain%20text).
    We apply modern cryptographic protocols (like TLS 1.3 for network
    connections) to prevent eavesdropping. Critical processes, such as
    the *journal alarm distribution*, are also encrypted. For example,
    if a user's compilation of entries is scheduled to be sent to
    contacts, that package is encrypted with the recipients' public keys
    ahead of time; thus, even if someone intercepts the package or the
    server is compromised, the content remains
    secure[\[14\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=The%20Whistleblower).
    *By designing features with encryption at their core, we ensure that
    no sensitive data ever appears in plaintext on any intermediate
    system.* This approach has a clear benefit: a breach of an Caderno
    server would not leak readable journals -- the attackers would only
    obtain ciphertext they cannot read.

-   **Federated Security Model:** In a federated network, each server
    (or "instance") is administratively separate. This limits the blast
    radius of any single security incident. If one server has a
    vulnerability or gets breached, only the data on that server is at
    risk, not the entire user base. We provide guidelines and tools for
    server operators to secure their instances (such as recommended
    firewall settings, automatic updates, intrusion detection, and
    default configs that follow security best practices). Moreover,
    federation allows private instances: if a journalist wants absolute
    security, they might run Caderno on a closed server just for
    themselves, massively reducing exposure. Our network protocols
    between servers are minimal and authenticated, to reduce trust
    between instances -- one compromised server cannot impersonate
    another or eavesdrop on private data exchanges. In essence,
    **decentralization is a security feature**: it avoids the peril of
    one central honeypot containing everyone's data and credentials.
    This also aids **censorship-resistance** -- with servers in many
    jurisdictions, it's extremely hard for an attacker or authoritarian
    entity to block or shut down Caderno
    entirely[\[3\]](https://medium.com/@sshshln/the-future-of-social-networking-decentralization-for-user-empowerment-privacy-and-freedom-from-a0a8f74790cb#:~:text=Both%20traditional%20and%20decentralized%20social,is%20presented%20in%20Table%201).
    Users can migrate between servers (with their data) if they lose
    confidence in a host's security, thanks to planned data portability
    features.

-   **User Security Features:** Caderno incorporates features to help
    users protect themselves. For example, we offer **multi-factor
    authentication (2FA)** for account access on servers (e.g., TOTP or
    hardware key support) to mitigate the risk of stolen passwords. We
    encourage strong passphrases for encrypting journals, and the app
    can integrate with secure hardware enclaves or password managers for
    managing keys safely. The client applications can have an **app
    lock** (PIN or biometric) so that even if someone gains access to
    your device momentarily, they cannot open the Caderno app without
    authorization (similar to how secure messaging apps implement a
    lock). Additionally, there is an option to **mask or hide sensitive
    entries** on the screen (for instance, a "panic mode" that quickly
    conceals the app or certain notes) -- useful in situations where a
    user is compelled to show their device. We also consider
    anti-tampering: the app will detect if its code has been modified
    (for example, by malware on a device) and warn the user or refuse to
    run if integrity is compromised. All these measures align with
    protecting users who might be under active threat.

-   **Secure Development and Auditing:** The Caderno project follows
    secure software development life cycle practices. This means our
    code is reviewed for security issues, we leverage static analysis
    and dependency auditing tools to catch vulnerabilities, and we
    promptly patch any issues discovered. Being open-source, we invite
    independent security researchers to audit our code. We plan to
    undergo periodic **third-party security audits** for critical
    components (similar to how Standard Notes underwent third-party
    security
    auditing[\[2\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=1,which%20often%20involves%20data%20collection))
    and will publish the results for full transparency. We also maintain
    a responsible disclosure program (or bug bounty program) to
    encourage and reward contributions from the security community.
    Importantly, because our ethos forbids secret backdoors, **any
    security weaknesses can be openly identified and fixed** -- there is
    no obfuscation or denial. Users can inspect cryptographic routines
    to verify their soundness. By leaning on community expertise,
    Caderno's security can continuously improve, which is crucial as new
    threats emerge.

-   **Protection Against Common Threats:** We harden Caderno against a
    range of known attack vectors. **Server Hardening:** Official
    Caderno releases come with security-hardened configurations (e.g.,
    strict transport security, content security policy for web
    interfaces, rate limiting to prevent brute-force attacks, and
    sandboxing of processes). **Database Security:** User data on
    servers is encrypted at rest (layered on top of E2EE, so even server
    admins must take extra steps to access raw data). Keys used for
    server-side functions are stored securely, and we avoid storing any
    sensitive plaintext. **Network Security:** All inter-server
    communication is signed and encrypted, preventing man-in-the-middle
    attacks. **Client Security:** The client apps (mobile, desktop, web)
    are signed and verified to prevent tampering and will use secure
    APIs (for example, employing certificate pinning when connecting to
    a known server). We also guard against **supply chain attacks** by
    reproducible builds and package verification, so that users
    downloading the app can be confident it hasn't been maliciously
    modified. **Privacy Threats:** We don't just secure against hackers,
    but also against unwarranted data requests. Since we don't hold
    plaintext data, even if we receive government subpoenas or requests,
    we cannot hand over journals in readable form -- our system design
    itself is your privacy defense. We would also transparently report
    any such requests (warrant canaries, etc., in jurisdictions where
    applicable).

-   **Emergency Response & Safety Mechanism:** Perhaps one of the most
    distinctive security aspects of Caderno is the **journal alarm
    (dead-man switch)** feature which intersects safety and
    cybersecurity. When a user enables this, their journal entries (or a
    subset) are packaged for later release. We treat this package with
    extreme care: it is **encrypted with the intended recipients' keys
    and possibly an additional layer of the user's own key**. The server
    or service that triggers the release does not need to know the
    content (and indeed cannot decrypt it). The timing mechanism (the
    "switch") is implemented securely -- for example, the user might
    have to periodically enter a secret or proof-of-life token, and if
    they fail to do so by the set time, the system queues the release.
    This design ensures there's **no single point where an attacker
    could hack and prematurely obtain the info** (a known risk if dead
    man's switches aren't
    encrypted[\[15\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=A%20man%20dies%20unexpectedly%2C%20leaving,family%20can%E2%80%99t%20access%20the%20wallets)).
    By requiring the attacker to also compromise the recipients or break
    strong encryption (both highly unlikely), Caderno's safety trigger
    **deters coercion and attacks**. It flips the script: if an
    adversary considers harming the user or seizing their device, they
    know that any such attempt could trigger the very outcome they fear
    -- dissemination of the user's evidence. This acts as a powerful
    **preventative security measure** for the user. We cite real
    scenarios: *a whistleblower might set such a switch to release
    documents if they disappear, which only achieves its goal if
    implemented with robust encryption and
    authentication[\[14\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=The%20Whistleblower).*
    Caderno builds this scenario into a user-friendly feature, so users
    don't have to jury-rig their own solution.

-   **Continuous Improvement:** Cybersecurity is not a one-time effort
    but an ongoing commitment. We will continuously monitor the
    landscape of threats (e.g., new spyware targeting activists,
    vulnerabilities in underlying software libraries, etc.). For
    instance, if a vulnerability in a cryptographic algorithm is
    discovered, Caderno will proactively update to stronger methods (our
    modular crypto design makes this feasible). We also plan regular
    updates and encourage users to keep their clients and servers
    updated by providing easy update mechanisms. Given our target user
    base may operate in dangerous environments, we also focus on
    **incident response**: if a user suspects their Caderno account or
    server is compromised, we provide clear steps to recover or migrate
    their data securely, revoke access, and communicate securely with
    them to resolve the issue. We also share cybersecurity knowledge
    with our community (educating users on how to secure their devices,
    use our tools safely, etc., since an app can only do so much if the
    endpoint device itself is compromised).

In conclusion, Caderno's cybersecurity measures are **comprehensive and
tailored to defend high-risk users**. By combining strong encryption, a
federated trust-minimized architecture, rigorous development practices,
and innovative safety features, we strive to make Caderno a fortress for
your personal writings and evidence. We understand the stakes --
breaches or leaks are not just embarrassing, they could be
life-threatening for some users. That reality drives us to leave no
stone unturned in securing Caderno. Our pledge is that we will continue
to fortify the app as technology and threats evolve, so that **users can
journal with peace of mind**, focusing on their story and mission while
we handle the shields and locks.

## Monetization Plan

Caderno is envisioned as an open-source, decentralized application,
which means traditional profit models (like selling user data or
advertising) are off the table -- by design, to uphold our privacy
ethos. Nonetheless, to ensure the project's sustainability and growth,
we have a thoughtful **monetization plan that aligns with our values**.
Our goal is to **fund development and operations in ways that *enhance*,
rather than compromise, user trust and empowerment.** Below are the key
components of our monetization strategy:

-   **Open-Source SaaS (Hosting Services):** We will offer an optional
    *managed hosting service* for Caderno journals -- essentially a
    **hosted cloud version of Caderno** for users who do not want to run
    their own server. While anyone can self-host Caderno for free (the
    software is open-source), running a server requires some technical
    knowledge and effort. Our paid hosting will cater to users who value
    convenience: we'll run an Caderno server for them, handle updates,
    backups, and security maintenance, in exchange for a subscription
    fee. Importantly, even on our hosted service, user data remains
    end-to-end encrypted -- we are charging for the service, not for
    access to their data. This model is often called *OpenSaaS*
    (open-source software offered as Software-as-a-Service) and has
    proven viable for many open source
    projects[\[16\]](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/#:~:text=OpenSaaS%20model).
    We will price it fairly, ensuring it's affordable while also
    balanced so that self-hosting remains an attractive free option for
    power users. The revenue from subscriptions will fund ongoing server
    costs and allow us to continuously improve Caderno. By bundling
    hosting with excellent customer support and perhaps extra
    conveniences (like one-click setup, custom domain, or increased
    storage), we provide value worth paying for without restricting the
    freedom of those who prefer to self-host.

-   **Enterprise and Organizational Solutions:** We anticipate that
    certain organizations -- for example, investigative journalism
    outlets, NGOs, or human rights organizations -- might want to deploy
    Caderno for their teams. We can monetize by offering **enterprise
    support contracts or customized solutions** for these cases. This
    could involve helping set up a private federated network of Caderno
    servers for an organization, integrating Caderno with their existing
    IT infrastructure, or building custom features that they need.
    Organizations dealing with sensitive data might especially
    appreciate the combination of encryption and self-hosting. We could
    offer hosted enterprise instances with enhanced administrative
    tools, or a consultancy model where we assist their IT staff in
    deployment. In line with open-source norms, the core software
    remains the same for everyone, but enterprises would pay for
    **priority support, training, and custom development**. This
    approach lets us capture value from clients with resources, while
    the improvements can often be rolled back into the open-source
    project, benefiting all users. It's a model used by many open source
    companies (e.g., offering paid support is a mainstream way to earn
    money while keeping the software
    free[\[17\]](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/#:~:text=Support%20plans)).

-   **Donations and Sponsorships:** Given Caderno's mission-oriented
    nature (supporting free expression, privacy, etc.), we believe many
    users and institutions will **voluntarily support the project**. We
    will set up channels for donations -- for instance, using platforms
    like **Open Collective**, which enable transparent funding of
    open-source
    projects[\[18\]](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/#:~:text=Donations).
    Through Open Collective or similar, individuals who believe in
    Caderno's cause can contribute one-time or recurring donations. We
    will also pursue sponsorships and grants from organizations aligned
    with our values: think digital rights foundations, privacy advocacy
    groups, or even tech companies that support open-source privacy
    tools. Such sponsors could provide funding without dictating the
    project's direction (we will publicly disclose sponsorship to
    maintain transparency). We have inspiration from other projects in
    this vein (for example, SecureDrop, an open-source whistleblower
    submission system, is grant- and donation-funded by media
    organizations and nonprofits). With a clear mission of empowering
    voices and protecting truth, Caderno is well positioned to attract
    **philanthropic or community funding**. We may run fundraising
    campaigns highlighting how contributions directly help journalists
    and activists around the world. All funds raised through donations
    will be reinvested into development, security audits, and
    subsidizing services for users who cannot pay.

-   **Premium Features or Add-Ons (Open-Core Model):** The base Caderno
    app will always be free and fully functional for private journaling.
    However, we may introduce **optional premium add-ons** for power
    users as a monetization lever. This might include advanced features
    that are not essential to the core mission but provide enhanced
    convenience or capabilities. Examples could be: AI-assisted
    journaling insights (if implemented in a privacy-preserving way),
    additional encryption key management options for organizations,
    secure cloud backup service beyond self-hosted options, or
    integration with other tools (say, an encrypted publishing workflow
    to selectively share journal entries as blog posts). These features
    could be offered under a modest subscription or one-time purchase.
    We will be very cautious here: any premium feature must not
    undermine privacy or create a walled garden; ideally it's more about
    **convenience and extended use-cases** rather than core security. We
    might adopt an *open-core* approach where the core remains fully
    open-source, while some peripheral tools or services are proprietary
    to paying customers. That said, we lean toward keeping as much as
    possible open-source; another approach is to have all features open,
    but paying users get early access to new features or priority in
    feature requests (this can overlap with the enterprise/custom
    model). We're exploring what premium offerings make sense that **do
    not fracture the user community or exclude those who can't pay**.

-   **Community Marketplace (Long-term Idea):** As Caderno grows, there
    could be scope for a **marketplace or ecosystem** of related tools,
    templates, or plugins. For example, perhaps some developers create
    plugins for Caderno (such as unique cryptographic tools, or
    visualization dashboards for your journaling patterns). We could
    allow a marketplace where third-party developers sell add-ons, and
    we take a small commission. This would stimulate an ecosystem and
    indirectly generate revenue. Another angle: if some users want
    physical products (like a hardware secure journal device, or
    merchandise supporting the cause), that could be a minor revenue
    stream too. These are tentative ideas for the future; the immediate
    focus is on the service and support models.

-   **No Advertisements or Data Sales -- Ever:** It's important to state
    what *we will not do*. We will **never monetize Caderno through ads,
    user data analytics, or selling user information**. Those methods
    would violate our core principles of privacy and trust. We won't
    impose paywalls that hinder basic access to the tool for those in
    need. Monetization is approached as a way to sustain the project and
    enhance it, not to exploit the user base. Our financial viability
    will come from providing genuine value (like reliable hosting or
    expert support) that users or sponsors are willing to pay for,
    rather than from turning users into the product. We understand this
    may cap potential profit, but Caderno is a mission-driven project
    first and foremost. We are confident that by building a strong
    reputation and user community, the project can attract sufficient
    financial support through the above ethical avenues.

-   **Transparency in Finance:** In line with our ethos of transparency,
    we will maintain open accounting of how the project is funded. If we
    raise money through Open Collective or donations, those ledgers are
    public. If we earn revenue from hosting or enterprise deals, we
    intend to share high-level numbers with the community in annual
    reports. Users will know that their subscription dollars or
    donations are going toward things like paying developers, running
    servers, security audits, community outreach, etc. This transparency
    helps build trust that monetization isn't making someone rich at the
    expense of the mission; instead, it's fueling the mission. We also
    plan to **reinvest profits** into providing free or discounted
    services for at-risk user groups (for example, setting up free
    hosting for a coalition of independent journalists in repressive
    regions, subsidized by paying customers elsewhere).

To summarize the monetization plan: **Caderno will sustain itself
through a combination of premium services, support, and community
goodwill -- all aligned with our open-source, user-first philosophy.**
By offering optional paid conveniences (like managed hosting and
enterprise support) and encouraging community funding, we can keep the
project healthy and evolving. This approach has precedent in successful
open-source projects and ensures that **our incentives remain aligned
with our users**. We succeed only by making a tool people find valuable
enough to support -- not by betraying their trust.

In the long run, we believe this model will not only monetize Caderno
effectively but also strengthen its community. Users who financially
support Caderno become stakeholders in its success, creating a virtuous
cycle: their funding improves the app, which in turn better serves them
and attracts more users. With prudent management and a focus on our core
values, Caderno can **achieve financial sustainability without ever
compromising the privacy, security, or empowerment of its users**. This
is how we intend to build a lasting platform that genuinely serves the
public good while standing on solid economic ground.

**Conclusion:** Caderno's mission, vision, ethos, and strategies
collectively paint the picture of a unique journaling platform --- one
that is **open, secure, and built for those who need it most**. By
adhering to our principles and smartly navigating monetization, we aim
to prove that technology can be both socially responsible and
sustainable. Caderno will always prioritize the **people** who use it
and the **truths** they bravely record. Together with our community, we
are building more than an app; we are building a movement of **privacy,
transparency, resilience, and empowerment** for all who have a story to
tell and a truth to safeguard.

**Sources:**

1.  Standard Notes Team -- *Security and Privacy Comparison of Google
    Keep vs Standard Notes* (Standard Notes
    Blog)[\[2\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=1,which%20often%20involves%20data%20collection)[\[19\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=4,end%20encrypted%20file%20storage)
2.  Apple Newsroom -- *Apple's Journal App Privacy
    Features*[\[10\]](https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2023/12/apple-launches-journal-app-a-new-app-for-reflecting-on-everyday-moments/#:~:text=Journal%20is%20built%20with%20privacy,added%20to%20their%20Journal%20entries)
3.  Cybernews -- *Apple Journal app
    limitations*[\[9\]](https://cybernews.com/editorial/apples-journal-app-privacy/#:~:text=Furthermore%2C%20the%20Journal%20app%20is,app%27s%20potential%20usability%20and%20accessibility)
4.  Internet Society -- *Encryption as a Tool for Advocacy and Human
    Rights*[\[5\]](https://www.internetsociety.org/resources/doc/2021/factsheet-how-encryption-can-protect-advocacy-groups-and-social-change-movements/#:~:text=Encryption%20is%20an%C2%A0essential%20tool%C2%A0that%20enables,advocacy%20groups%20rely%20on%20encryption)[\[4\]](https://www.internetsociety.org/resources/doc/2021/factsheet-how-encryption-can-protect-advocacy-groups-and-social-change-movements/#:~:text=,communications%20from%20surveillance%20and%20interception)
5.  Sasha Shilina (Medium) -- *Advantages of Decentralized Networks
    (Privacy, Censorship
    Resistance)*[\[3\]](https://medium.com/@sshshln/the-future-of-social-networking-decentralization-for-user-empowerment-privacy-and-freedom-from-a0a8f74790cb#:~:text=Both%20traditional%20and%20decentralized%20social,is%20presented%20in%20Table%201)
6.  Cipherwill Blog -- *The Need for E2EE in Dead Man's Switch for
    Whistleblowers*[\[14\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=The%20Whistleblower)
7.  Scaleway Blog -- *Monetization Models for Open-Source
    Projects*[\[16\]](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/#:~:text=OpenSaaS%20model)[\[17\]](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/#:~:text=Support%20plans)
8.  Open Collective Documentation -- *Funding Open-Source via Open
    Collective
    (Donations)*[\[18\]](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/#:~:text=Donations)
9.  Standard Notes -- *Google Keep's Lack of E2EE and Advertising
    Model*[\[20\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=2,Google)
10. Standard Notes -- *Public Source Code and Transparency as Trust
    Builders*[\[1\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=file%20storage%2C%20ensuring%20superior%20data,end%20encrypted%20file%20storage)
11. Reddit (r/privacy) -- *Google Keep Employee Access to Notes (no
    end-to-end
    encryption)*[\[11\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=Employees%20can%20read%20your%20notes%E2%9C%85%E2%9D%8C,factor%20authentication%E2%9C%85%E2%9C%85)

[\[1\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=file%20storage%2C%20ensuring%20superior%20data,end%20encrypted%20file%20storage)
[\[2\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=1,which%20often%20involves%20data%20collection)
[\[8\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=2,which%20often%20involves%20data%20collection)
[\[11\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=Employees%20can%20read%20your%20notes%E2%9C%85%E2%9D%8C,factor%20authentication%E2%9C%85%E2%9C%85)
[\[19\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=4,end%20encrypted%20file%20storage)
[\[20\]](https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative#:~:text=2,Google)
What makes Standard Notes a great Google Keep alternative End-To-End
Encrypted Notes App

<https://standardnotes.com/compare/google-keep-alternative>

[\[3\]](https://medium.com/@sshshln/the-future-of-social-networking-decentralization-for-user-empowerment-privacy-and-freedom-from-a0a8f74790cb#:~:text=Both%20traditional%20and%20decentralized%20social,is%20presented%20in%20Table%201)
The future of social networking: Decentralization for user empowerment,
privacy, and freedom from censorship \| by Sasha Shilina \| Medium

<https://medium.com/@sshshln/the-future-of-social-networking-decentralization-for-user-empowerment-privacy-and-freedom-from-a0a8f74790cb>

[\[4\]](https://www.internetsociety.org/resources/doc/2021/factsheet-how-encryption-can-protect-advocacy-groups-and-social-change-movements/#:~:text=,communications%20from%20surveillance%20and%20interception)
[\[5\]](https://www.internetsociety.org/resources/doc/2021/factsheet-how-encryption-can-protect-advocacy-groups-and-social-change-movements/#:~:text=Encryption%20is%20an%C2%A0essential%20tool%C2%A0that%20enables,advocacy%20groups%20rely%20on%20encryption)
Factsheet: How Encryption Can Protect Advocacy Groups and Social Change
Movements - Internet Society

<https://www.internetsociety.org/resources/doc/2021/factsheet-how-encryption-can-protect-advocacy-groups-and-social-change-movements/>

[\[6\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=A%20journalist%20sets%20a%20switch,endangering%20him)
[\[12\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=Traditional%20digital%20will%20services%20often,%E2%80%9D)
[\[13\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=Without%20encryption%2C%20anyone%20accessing%20the,your%20data%20in%20plain%20text)
[\[14\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=The%20Whistleblower)
[\[15\]](https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae#:~:text=A%20man%20dies%20unexpectedly%2C%20leaving,family%20can%E2%80%99t%20access%20the%20wallets)
Why Dead Man's Switch Need End-to-End Encryption

<https://www.cipherwill.com/blog/why-dead-mans-switch-need-end-to-end-encryption-1fb6d63626188008a410ea6fea4bfaae>

[\[7\]](https://www.aclu.org/news/privacy-technology/the-vital-role-of-end-to-end-encryption#:~:text=The%20Vital%20Role%20of%20End,are%20shielded%20from%20prying%20eyes)
The Vital Role of End-to-End Encryption \| ACLU

<https://www.aclu.org/news/privacy-technology/the-vital-role-of-end-to-end-encryption>

[\[9\]](https://cybernews.com/editorial/apples-journal-app-privacy/#:~:text=Furthermore%2C%20the%20Journal%20app%20is,app%27s%20potential%20usability%20and%20accessibility)
Apple\'s Journal app: a breakthrough in digital diary-keeping or a
privacy concern? \| Cybernews

<https://cybernews.com/editorial/apples-journal-app-privacy/>

[\[10\]](https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2023/12/apple-launches-journal-app-a-new-app-for-reflecting-on-everyday-moments/#:~:text=Journal%20is%20built%20with%20privacy,added%20to%20their%20Journal%20entries)
Apple launches Journal app, a new app for reflecting on everyday
moments - Apple

<https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2023/12/apple-launches-journal-app-a-new-app-for-reflecting-on-everyday-moments/>

[\[16\]](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/#:~:text=OpenSaaS%20model)
[\[17\]](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/#:~:text=Support%20plans)
[\[18\]](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/#:~:text=Donations)
How to monetize your open source project (and pay your developers) \|
Scaleway Blog

<https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/how-to-monetize-your-open-source-project/>
